# LOCEAN Welcome Guide

> by Brady S. Ferster & Leo F. Borchert

We would like to warmly welcome you to Paris and LOCEAN! Here, you will have the opportunity to advance and improve your scientific skills in a dynamic and innovative environment. And we can’t forget to mention, the people working here are great as well -- have the best of fun working here!
In this welcome guide, we would like to give some pointers about arriving at the laboratory (the “lab”) and to help make the transition to Paris as smooth and efficient as possible. Maybe this is your first time being in France or just your first official position in academia or postdoc, whatever the terms, both of us were new to working in Paris (and France as a whole) and wanted to share our experiences with all incoming postdocs, PhDs, or visiting scientists. This guide will step you through obtaining your official email address, access to the computer network, obtaining a metro card, and even some details on how to file taxes (although we are far from experts on that!). We will also include some ideas on how to get around in Paris and explore more of the countryside. Hopefully this guide will be helpful and ease you into the Parisian lifestyle!

Version 0.2 General life

## Appartment Hunting 
Paris is famously a nightmare to find an apartment in, especially so for non-French people. There are, however, several websites that offer (often furnished) apartments specifically for people from abroad. One such option is www.lodgis.com or www.bienici.com. For cheaper options, you might want to explore shared housing opportunities, for example at www.leboncoin.fr or www.nestpick.com. Another good option for incoming internationals is Cité Universitaire, which is the university’s student housing. You can register for apartment offers here https://www.ciup.fr/en/houses/applying-for-housing/. While not being super centrally located, Cite Universitaire offers relatively cheap rates for every option from a room in a shared apartment to your own studio or apartment (https://www.chimie.ens.fr/wp-content/uploads/2022/06/BROCHURE-FR-Logements-Chercheurs-2022-02.pdf).

Speaking of location: Paris is quite a big city, so in which areas should you look for an apartment? Generally speaking, everything intra muros, that means inside the peripherique highway, is fine & should be safe. Information on the areas (les arrondissements) can be found on the internet, e.g. here http://www.parisnet.com/parismap.html. Our two cents on the topic: Great areas to live in (lively areas with bars and clubs) are: around Bastille (11e, 10e, 20e), Montmartre and Pigalle (9e, 18e), Republique and le Marais (2e, 3e, 4e) and the Quartier Latin (where LOCEAN is located; 5e, 6e). Areas around the Eiffel Tower (7e), Champs Elysees (8e, 16e) and Louvre (1e) are nice as well, but more touristy and quite posh.

A more general problem with renting an apartment in France for non-French is that landlords often ask for a “garant”, meaning a guarantor that often needs to own real estate in France. This can be a substantial challenge for foreigners. Sometimes, supervisors offer to take that role. Otherwise, solutions without garant need to be found. The lodgis-website does not always require garants, making it a good option for foreigners. Cité Universitaire also works without garant.
Renting an apartment can also require a French bank account. We will cover how to get one in the next section.

## Bank Account
When starting work in Paris, you’ll need to have a French bank account: not only for renting an apartment, but also to have your salary transferred into. You can open a bank account in most bank offices, which there are many across town. Popular banks in France include Crédit Agricole, HSBC, BNP Paribas, Banque Postale, Crédit Mutuel, Crédit du Nord and others. An example of a socially conscious bank (meaning they invest in sustainable and social projects) is Crédit Cooperatif, although that one has fewer offices than other banks. Having a bank account including credit card will cost you around 5,- per month.
There are different approaches to opening an account. For some banks, you can do it online. In most cases, however, you’ll have to go to a bank office in person. Just go there and, depending on their policy, you can open an account right away or they will give you an appointment with one of their managers to open the account. Opening the account will need your residency card (if you are from outside the EU) or your ID (if you are a EU citizen). You’ll also need some proof of residency in France, usually a rental contract, a statement from your landlord alongside their proof of residency, or a facture (bill) for essential services like electricity or internet, made out to your name at your French address. Also bring your work contract to show that you’ll receive regular transfers into your account.
In some banks, you’ll need a French (mobile) phone number to open an account, so we will treat that topic next.

## Phone Number
Getting a French mobile plan can be a good idea to save some money on roaming costs (depending on where you are from). There are several companies that offer mobile plans, the biggest (but not necessarily cheapest) of which are Orange, SFR, Bouygues Telecom, and Free Mobile. Plans from these companies are on average ~20euros a month, but do have some cheaper, but more restrictive options. I personally use Free Mobile: I come from the United States and with my contract (20 euros a month) I am able to call my family and friends without charge and when I visit the US I get 20gb of data. There are many countries on the list too, not just the US and Europe. Cheaper mobile plans (~10euros or pay as you use) are hosted by, among others, Reglo Mobile: https://www.reglomobile.fr/. In any case, a French address will be necessary to get a French mobile plan.

## The Hamster Wheel
You’ll see that fixing these three things -- apartment, bank and phone -- can already run you into substantial trouble, as you might enter a vicious cycle: Renting an apartment will probably require a bank account, which needs a phone number (and sometimes residency in France), which needs a bank account and residency in France, which requires a bank account...
There are, to our knowledge, only individual approaches to breaking this hamster wheel. One way to do it is by renting an apartment that does not require a French bank account at the very beginning, like at Cité Universitaire (who are accustomed to internationals) or through some websites specifically set up for internationals coming to Paris. There also may be some instances where banks may let you open an account without proof of residency if you already have an account with their international partners (e.g. HSBC). None of these are truly reliable though, so you’ll have to figure out YOUR way to deal with this issue. Good luck! (: Don’t hesitate to ask your international colleagues about this as well, everyone has their own story of how they managed to break the wheel.

## Health Insurance 
France has an excellent national healthcare scheme which you will be a part of as an employee at LOCEAN. In general, your employer should register you for the national healthcare scheme. Unfortunately, that does only rarely happen. So to be sure, you can register yourself using the form under https://www.ameli.fr/sites/default/files/Documents/612946/document/application_for_membership_in_the_french_health_care_system-s1106_assurance_maladie.pdf. 1-3 months after sending out this form (by post) you will receive your Carte Vitale, which you can use to go to see a doctor. More general information on French health insurance can be found in English here https://www.ameli.fr/paris/assure/english-pages.
If you want health insurance beyond the national plan (which usually covers 1⁄2 of your total expenses), you can get so-called “mutuelles” to cover more of your expenses for specific issues. These are very specific and differ widely in terms of their cost and services provided, so best speak to a French colleague about which ones might be a good idea. These are not mandatory, though, and you might be fine without getting a mutuelle.
Once you have your Carte Vitale, you can make easy appointments for visits to doctors online here: https://www.doctolib.fr/.
Titre de Séjour and Carte de Séjour
I’ve added this section to try to give a little insight and links for renewing your visa. In short, this process can either be very easy and straightforward or coming from the Mission Impossible series. The process itself is done online here: https://administration-etrangers-en-france.interieur.gouv.fr/particuliers/#/. But be aware, the site crashes quite often and appointments are hard to come by. My suggestion is to work on this as soon as possible (I believe 3 months in advance is the earliest possible!) and don’t be afraid to ask for help. And for in-depth instructions on the start-to-finish process of acquiring a new visa, you can go here: https://france-visas.gouv.fr/en/web/france-visas/visa-application-guidelines

## Translated Documents
At some point, there is a good chance you will need to translate documents from your native language to French. When I applied for a visa and the Carte de Sejour, my Phd diploma and identification cards were accepted in English. However, there is a good chance you will need a translated document at some point. Perhaps even when submitting for your health insurance! But don’t worry, it’s not too trivial and can be quite rapid. There are two ideal options to try. You could go through the prefecture and France education, but keep in mind they also take a lot of holidays. Another option is to go through a sworn translator, which there is a list of those in France and outside of France on the France education link. For a Phd diploma or birth certificate, one should expect to pay between 60 to 100 euros, and the price heavily varies between sworn translators and the amount of pages. Don’t be afraid to ask a few for a quote and find the most ideal time and price for your needs. As another option, I also had my birth certificate signed by a sworn translator in the United States before arriving in France. But remember, once you have a sworn translation as a PDF, the translation is valid forever and you can share it multiple times. It may seem a bit expensive for a student, but could be useful in the future.

## Language Classes
At this point, you will probably want to inscribe to French language classes to start understanding what is going on around you. Sorbonne Université offers classes on campus for all levels of French proficiency. Costs for the classes may be covered by the institute, subject to negotiation with your supervisor and/or funding agency. You can register for French lessons here http://www.langues.upmc.fr/fr/francais-langue-etrangere.html.

## Getting Around Town 
Paris is pretty big. Getting around town therefore often needs some help beyond just walking everywhere. Luckily, there is a quite comprehensive system of public transport, including buses, the underground (“Metro”) and medium-range trains (“RER”). You can buy tickets for all at the Metro or RER stops, and on board the buses. You can also get a NaviGO card, which will let you use all public transport for a reduced monthly/quarterly/yearly fee. The NaviGO card works for all 5 zones of Paris, metros, buses, trains, and can even be attached to a Velib’ (bike rental, see below) account. To get partial reimbursement on your NaviGO through CNRS (if that is who you are employed through), fill out the form in the link provided. It should take ~1 month to be reflected on your paycheck, but you can get 50% reimbursed. Other funders also have reimbursement schemes for NaviGO; ask for it!
Another option to get around Paris is by bike (we just referenced one company called Velib’ above!); although still not ideal, the biking situation in Paris has improved a lot recently. There is a network of rental bikes called Velib’ with stations to pick up or return the bikes across the city -- one is right outside the main entrance to Jussieu to the left. You can register for an account with Velib’ online (https://www.velib-metropole.fr/en_GB). The basic plan is 30-40 Euros a year. Every first half hour on a regular bike (the green ones) is included in that fee (which means that you can also ride one bike for a half hour, exchange it for a different one at a Velib’ station, and continue riding at zero extra cost), but there is also the option of taking e-bikes (the blue ones) at a small extra cost per time used. You can also buy used bikes, for example at https://www.leboncoin.fr/.

## Getting Around France/Europe
Being fairly centrally located in France, Paris is a great starting point for day trips, weekend trips, or vacation in France or the rest of Europe. The French train network is excellent and can be used fairly easily. You can buy tickets here https://en.oui.sncf/en/. There are also numerous different cards that can be purchased that will give you an advantage for follow-up bookings, such as the Carte Jeune (“youth card”; 12-27 years old, 30% reduction on all train travel, 49 Euros per year) or the Carte Weekend (“weekend card”; 27-59 years old, 30% reduction on train travel on weekends for you plus one other person). Pay attention though, the SNCF cards do occasionally go on a flash sale, meaning you can get them for ~30 Euros ;)

## Taxes 
Taxes are complicated. Even after almost 3 years in Paris we haven’t really figured them out. Generally, income tax will be automatically deducted from your paycheck. At the end of the year, you may be able to claim some of it back, or be asked to pay more. The tax office will contact you directly about this tax balancing through the mail or its online portal https://www.impots.gouv.fr/. You can then craft a tax declaration if you disagree with this balance. How to do that properly still eludes us... But usually you can find French people at the lab to discuss tax issues with. Also, you may be able to access your payslips online (at https://ensap.gouv.fr/) to double check your taxed income etc.
One thing to watch in your potential second year is that the regular tax deduction then is based on the total amount of taxes you paid during your first year, i.e. when the total amount of income tax you paid in year 2 reaches the one that you paid in year 1 they may just stop deducting taxes. So if you started during the year (not in January), chances are that you will not automatically pay enough taxes in year 2 to cover the required amount. While initially raising your net salary, this effect can result in the tax office asking considerable amounts of money in retrospect, so keep an eye on this. You might need to pay up to 1000 Euros in late taxes after your second year, and that’s unfortunately completely correct.

## Sports at Sorbonne
As a member of Sorbonne University you can benefit from the activities offered by the DAPS (Department of Physical and Sports Activities of Sorbonne) and the AS (Sports Association). The DAPS is designed to practice “leisure” sports, you don’t have to pay anything extra and you can register for up to two activities. The AS asks for an additional financial participation, variable according to the chosen activity and can also propose participation in competitions (depending on the sport). In both cases you will need a medical certificate to register. You can discover the available sports and register via the following platform (you will need a Sorbonne account, only available in French for the moment). Cultural activities are also available on this platform (https://activites.sorbonne-universite.fr/accueil-activites)
     
## Lab Life
By now, having mastered life in Paris , you might want to get started working as well. LOCEAN is located very centrally in Paris, right south of the river Seine (the left shore; la rive gauche) in the “latin area” (le Quartier Latin), which is part of the 5e arrondissement. The address is 4 Place Jussieu, 75005 Paris. LOCEAN is located on the Jussieu campus of (former) Université Pierre et Marie Curie (UPMC), which is part of Sorbonne Universités. By public transport, you can reach the campus easily, e.g. by taking the Metro lines 7 or 10 to Jussieu. The exit of the Metro is right outside the main entrance of the campus. When entering the campus, be aware that security will “control” your bag (which means they won’t really look at it, but you should present the open bag to them). This is a security measure that was introduced after the Paris terror attacks in November 2015.
At the lab, there are a few people we would like to introduce; most of whom are located on the 4th floor between towers 45-55. First, the head of the Lab is Jean-Benoit Charrassin. Jean-Benoit is very friendly, it never hurts to go introduce yourself. Next are the head of administration, Eric Fourlin and Francoise Pinsard (adm-support@locean.ipsl.fr). And for IT and tech support, Frederic Boler and Julien Vincent (support@locean.ipsl.fr).

## Email Adress
Generally, your supervisor should take care of this for you, but if you want to do this yourself, contact the LOCEAN front office about your account. When your LOCEAN account is opened, an email address will be opened along with it. It should have the format firstname.lastname@locean.ipsl.fr. You can log in here, using the credentials you chose when you opened the account: https://webmail.locean.ipsl.fr.

## Computer Network
Ciclad is one of the computing clusters that is used at LOCEAN. Opening an account on Ciclad is relatively simple and can be done in ~1 day. All you need to do is follow the steps provided in the link. But essentially you have to generate a key and get in contact with the mesocentre. From there, you can set up a python environment. There has been a lot of work on this end and the mesocentre has a very well detailed webpage to help!
Ciclad: https://mesocentre.ipsl.fr/account-opening/
Python: https://documentations.ipsl.fr/MESO_User/index.html

## Connecting to Printers, Reserving a room, Collecting keys to an office
Connecting to the printer can be essential, as much of the initial paperwork must be signed and photocopied...and of course it’s nice to print sometimes too. Adding the printer associated with your floor can be done here. But there are a lot more resources available from the Documentation informatique section of the Intranet, including access to the LOCEAN VPN, Matlab, Microsoft Office, and F-Secure (http://info.locean-ipsl.upmc.fr/fr/antivirus/). The Intranet also has a section to reserve meeting rooms (Réservation des salles de réunion), which can be very practical as well if you have a virtual workshop, meeting, or conference. Or to request an 😉 office space and desk (Demande de bureau). After you successfully have an office space, a KABA key and lab access badge (combined into 1 key!) will be reserved in your name. The key can be collected from the Access Control Service, located on the ground floor between towers 55-65 (access is from tower 65).

## Eduroam
Most desks at LOCEAN are equipped with wired network access. However, you may be interested to join WIFI networks at some point for more mobility.
For access to the Eduroam WIFI network in Paris and many other universities around the world, you need to register with the UPMC network. The LOCEAN front desk can help you with that, by adding you to the annuaire of UPMC. You will then receive login credentials and be able to connect to Eduroam. The process of connecting the first time is a bit complicated, but https://cat.eduroam.org provides excellent help (make sure to choose “UPMC” from the list of hosts)!

## Surrounding areas (take breaks from research!)
Quartier Latin is a vibrant area with a lot of young people, restaurants and bars. As a result, it is easy to get takeout for lunch (for example galette and crepes -- French pancakes -- on Rue Mouffetard), sit down at a bar for some food, a coffee or an early beer. Bars in the area are also a popular choice for after work get-togethers (the so-called Apéros), which are an essential part of Parisian (and French) lifestyle. When you are in the mood for beer, be aware that prices can vary heavily between bars; it’s not uncommon to pay 7-10 Euros for a pint (une pinte), whereas other bars might offer the same for 4,50 or even less. Watch Happy Hours, which almost all places have and usually announce on some kind of board outside the bar, or download the MrGoodBeer app on your phone to stay up to date with the cheapest beer prices. There are also some banks and supermarkets around campus (ask google) if you need to get groceries.
In case you prefer to spend your breaks taking walks, there are three recommendations we have for you: les Arenes de Lutece are remnants of an ancient Roman arena, located about 5 minutes by foot from the institute. Nowadays they are embedded in a little park, where people like to go for lunch, sit on the old stairs, and watch kids play football or old people play pétanque on the arena floor. Another option for more serious walks (the Arenes park is quite small) is along the Seine, which offers ample opportunity to stretch your legs. Finally, le jardin des plantes, the botanical garden, is about 5 minutes away as well and offers a zoo as well as some greenery with nice surroundings of old mansions, most of which now house museums.

